<!-- Title: The CS education I never had -->

## A little backstory

I went to university in Pakistan, at the Lahore University of Management Sciences (commonly known as LUMS) during 2012-2017. LUMS has a reputation among many of being one of the best universities in Pakistan. LUMS also has the reputation of being an _elitist_ university, I would agree with that notion. You need to belong to a certain socio-economic class to be able to afford tuition and all other facilites it has to offer. There is an invisible barrier to entry.

This post is about my experience having gone through the Computer Science programme at LUMS.

I initially went to university with the intention of enrolling in a Bachelors of Science in Electrical Engineering. It was what I had some prior experience in, I enjoyed messing around with circuits pre-university and it felt like the best fit for me at the time. I attended a career day at the end of my first year spring semester where all the head of dpeartments presented what doing a major in their field of expertise would look like going forward. I had taken an introduction to programming course in the first year and thought it to be captivating and engaging. I didn't need much convincing by the head of the CS department to enlist.

During the following summer I decided to take up an entry level internship at a software house to see how this world works in reality. I ended up learning a fair amount of Java during my short stint there, but nothing beyond the fundamentals. Still, I thought this was good progress for an absolute beginner with a _real_ programming language (the previous course in programming was primarily in MATLAB, for some reason the department thought that was a good entry point. In hindsight they should have used python instead). I thought this experience would be helpful in my upcoming course on _Introduction to Programming_ which was taught using C++.

A couple lectures down the line and I start losing motivation to dive deeper into it. They start out by teaching you about how many bytes each data is, how pointers work, what recursion is, what object oriented programming is etc. As an absolute beginner I couldn't care less about these things. I just wanted to make something with minimal overhead, without having to think about dealocating memory and garbage collection etc. I understand that these concepts are _fundamentals_ that every programmer should know, but what about the time and place? It took me years after taking that course and a ton of self study to really understand why thinking about these things is important anyway. Slowly and surely this took a massive hit on my drive to learn. I was already struggling with this course 1/3 of the way in. My assignments went largely uncompleted, my lab work was abysmal, my assigned TA was acted as a gatekeeper. I think this was my first experience with _Impostor Syndrome_, something I would struggle with years to come (and still do to some extent).

I had a meeting with the professor who was offering this course about my poor performance and I told him what I felt like my problem was at the time. That I was struggling to understand these concepts and needed more time than my peers to really get what was going on, which ended up feeling like I was part of some race where I didn't hear the firing gun to get going and was just going to be playing catchup for the rest of the term. What followed was the single most diheartening conversation you can have with a beginner wanting to get good. He said "Maybe being a programmer isn't for you". Wanting him to clarify I asked "Okay, so what else can I do with a CS degree if not becoming a programmer?" and with a condescending sniker he replied "Well, you could always become a product manager". I left his office feeling completely deflated and demoralized. "What if he's right? What if I don't have what it takes to be a programmer?". I don't blame myself for thinking that at the time, from all I could see around me being a programmer was part of your identity, as opposed to just being another toolbox in your tool shed to solve problems with.

Part of me wants to think that the professor was trying to help in his own way, perhaps he thought he was being "real" with me, to save me the pain of having to realize this further down the line that this was indeed "not for me". On the other hand part of me belives that it is a teacher's responsibility to bring the best out in their students, to help them overcome barriers, especially the intangible mental barriers we set up for ourselves like not believing in our own abilities and grit. Looking back I can almost see my career in CS working out so differently than it has if I had recieved an ounce of empathy at the time. No regrets though, I had to go through what I had to at the time to be where I am today, and for that I am grateful.

### The toxicity of CS Education

People on the inside of STEM fields glorify what it is to work in it. To maintain a perception that "you must be _this_ smart to ride the STEM rollercoaster", making people believe they're "just not smart enough" to be able to do this. What a toxic idea, to pit someone against their own selves. If that isn't manipulation I don't know what is.

This also speaks volumes about why we see such brilliantly apathetic people in CS. As professors, as students, as researchers.